---
layout: post
title: Solo travel vs. travel with friends
description:
summary:
tags:
  - writings
---

I've been fortunate to have spent time traveling both solo and with others, for extended periods of time.

Most people choose to travel with others. But I think about it like this: If you're generally starting life in your early 20s years and settling down in your 30s, there's only a short period in your mid-late 20s when its possible to go alone. Half of what's awesome during this time is the youth and wonder at that age; half of it is learning to adapt to a foreign environment.

To give an example, when I told Indian friends I was spending a month by myself in India, all of them suggested I avoid doing it. It would be dirty, unsafe, chaotic, they told me. In hindsight, I came out better for it. By the time I left I was beginning to feel like a local. Knew the tricks of the trade, if you will.

Let me offer a comparative. A friend of mine is trying to build a company. When he got his first paying customer, he told me "This experience taught me I can make money with my own hands. Not having to survive by working for someone else. When things don't go well, I know I don't need to rely on anyone else." I found that to be a relevant insight. In a worst case scenario, knowing I can adapt to a place where I don't speak the language, don't know the culture, can't relate to the locals, don't know the geography, etc. helps anchor my life.

Enough with the life meta talk, time to get down to business. I've done some reflection between traveling solo and traveling with friends. Here are some differences I've noticed:

**Traveling solo**:

1. <u>More oriented toward learning</u> -- In my experience, traveling solo leave me more engaged with my destination. This is just an attitude thing. In theory, going with others with a targeted goal of learning could be highly actionable. Discussing what we learned or saw would bolster our takeaways. But rarely does that happen when traveling in groups because the express goal isn't to "learn", it's to have fun. So what happens is that I might see something but forget later in the trip or afterwards because my attention is shifted elsewhere. When I travel alone, I'm more apt to take steps like reading up online after visiting somewhere and following-up on things I saw before I forget.
2. <u>More meaningful conversations with locals</u> -- Group travel is oriented towards spending time with companions. Hence it becomes more difficult to engage with locals. The only instance I can remember doing that successfully was during our hourlong drive to the Kuala Lumpur airport -- and only because the driver could only speak Chinese and we were in a captured setting. And I felt guilty as the others in my party couldn't communicate/I had to translate. But these are the type of memories I think about to this day. Xi Jinping once said when he thinks about Americans, he thinks about the kindness the Iowan family he stayed with showed him when he visited in his early-30s. It's a similar vibe when I think about my short time in these foreign countries.
3. <u>More destination optionality</u> -- Sometimes the other(s) I'm planning a trip with don't want to go to the same places as me. This has happened to me multiple times. I always wanted to go to India, but when I proposed it to a friend previously, they (probably accurately) assessed it wasn't the best fit for them. The other way happens too. I'm actually down to go anywhere but when a friend asked last year if I was interested in going to Kazakhstan, I told them I had other places I prioritized higher. (Kazakhstan is a gorgeous place, by the way. Or so I've heard and seen on social media. It would still be nice to go one day.)
4. <u>More control of itinerary</u> -- I suppose this is personal taste since some people are fine traveling without a plan. That's challenging to me. I want to be time-maxing the time I have. But when going alone, trip planning is up to me. It has its ups and downs. Biggest pro is that I can do what I want, see what I want, eat what I want, etc. For example, the first time I went to Palestine, I got the impression a companion didn't find the hectic, tense environment that enjoyable. Generally speaking, Palestine has much to see that is objectively sad. He much preferred the relative comfort of Israel. The second time I went to Palestine, I had more time to look at the separation wall, visit the Banksy hotel, things like that.
5. <u>More research required</u> -- Conversely, itinerary creation requires more time spent on planning. This is the other side of having more itinerary control. Sometimes it's nice to just show up and tag along. For example, I visited the UAE with a local. Was able to visit both popular and low-key hotspots because the person I was with knew the top things to do. Didn't need to do any research beforehand since I had a de-facto tour guide.
6. <u>More personal growth</u> -- I took traveling solo as a great opportunity to step outside my day-to-day life. It gave me a chance to think. To get more clarity. To see places where people lived differently from me. Particularly in a place like China and Russia where differences aren't just superficial but as deep as social values. And ultimately that taught me fresh perspective.

**Traveling with others**:

1. <u>More fun</u> -- This is ultimately a personal choice. Human relationships are important to me. I like to share experiences with people. That's only possible when others are there so this type of travel is more suited for pleasure.
2. <u>(Potentially) more cost-effective</u> -- Going with others is cheaper if the costs are split. Lodging is cheaper by several factors. Food is cheaper too when ordering and sharing among a table. Of course, if you're taking someone like a partner and paying for their expenses, then it won't be. So this CAN be cheaper, but not always.
3. <u>More convenient</u> -- I'm using 'convenience' here as a broad term used to mean a sense of teamwork. For a personal story, someone I was with came down with food poisoning in Mexico City. It was convenient for me to run to the nearby pharmacy to grab medication for them. Them having to do that alone while under the weather in a foreign environment would've been crappy.
4. <u>More challenging to navigate personalities</u> -- People advise couples to live together before getting married to see if living habits are compatible. It's similar with friends. Sometimes you don't know how well you get along until you've spent weeks traveling with each other. Tempers flare up, people get annoyed, messy living habits grow frustrating even in the short-term. These things happen. Strong friendships survive.
5. <u>More prone to disruptions</u> -- Giving responsibilties to others means something they're in charge might go wrong. I once nearly missed a non-refundable meal in London because the person organizing dinner mixed up our reservation time. Another instance, someone in my group going to Canada forgot THEIR PASSPORT. I've made mistakes too: One time I meant to book a group flight returning to Tel Aviv from Eilat and accidentally purchased a flight from Tel Aviv to Eilat instead. I suppose Murphy's Law is bound to apply when traveling.

Between the two, there is no better choice. Whether one is better is up to personal preference. Regardless which one you prefer, the only thing I wish you is a safe and happy travels.
